[Claire] Previously...
General Schuyler
desperately needs soldiers
up at Fort Ticonderoga.
I'm afraid my wife
and I have business
of a personal nature to
attend to in Scotland.
Perhaps your business can wait.
I wasn't prepared to
join a war tonight.
- I won't let you go without me.
- I'm comin' with ye too.
[Jamie] He had a child
wi' his Mohawk wife.
[Tsotehweh] If his spirit
is not strong enough.
the child cannot take
root in the womb.
Are you Denzell Hunter?
Yer neighbor said
ye were a physician?
I am.
This is William Ransom.
He's been injured.
[Rachel] It seems he's overcome
the worst of his fever.
Will you tell him
goodbye for me?
And give him this too.
It was a pleasure to make your
acquaintance. Miss Hunter.
I'm applying for the
plant inspector position.
That environment's not
suitable for a female.
Where are all the
biscuits and crisps?
It was the Nuckelavee.
A folktale from
the Northern Isles.
I met one. The
Nuckelavee is real.
[singer] ♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪ Billow and breeze ♪
♪ Islands and seas ♪
♪ Mountains of rain and sun ♪
♪ All that was good ♪
♪ All that was fair ♪
♪ All that was me ♪
♪ Is gone ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
[dramatic music plays]
♪ ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
[children yelling and laughing]
[Jemmy] Got you. You're it.
[children laughing]
Come back here.
This isn't tight.
Jem. Mandy.
Mama.
What are you two doing?
You know you're not
supposed to be here.
I told you not to
play in the graveyard.
I know. but we wanted
to play hide and seek.
And Mandy wanted
to talk to Grandda.
[soft music plays]
And why is this a
good place to do it?
Well. he's here. isn't he?
I-I-I-I don't know.
I suppose he could be.
♪ ♪
You haven't found
Grandda's grave.
have you. Jem?
[Jemmy] No.
But he said if I ever came here.
I should leave him
a stone. so I did.
I built him a cairn.
Come see.
Not today. Jem.
Let's go home.
Mandy. come on. sweetheart.
You too.
♪ ♪
[Roger] Brianna!
[sniffles]
I'm in here.
[somber music plays]
♪ ♪
Apparently the kids go to
the graveyard all the time.
Oh. sweetheart.
♪ ♪
And no. I didn't see
Mama and Da's headstones.
And I never want to.
But the kids go
there to visit Da.
Jemmy said he was there.
Oh. Bree. I'm sorry.
I'll talk to him.
He's just...
making stuff up again.
like the Nuckelavee.
But it is possible though
that Mama and Da might've
been buried here.
Your parents did say they came
to Scotland in their letters.
I know we said we'd wait
to read another one. but...
[sighs] I was just missing them.
Hey.
We've waited long enough.
[sniffles]
[laughs] Okay.
[soft music plays]
- Thank you.
- Mm.
♪ ♪
[exhales heavily]
[Roger] "June 18. 1777.
Fort Ticonderoga."
What on earth are
they doing there?
[Claire] "Dear Bree.
"as you've doubtless
gathered from the heading
"of this letter. we are
not yet in Scotland.
"Your father was
conscripted into service
"with the Continental Army.
"We've been stationed
at Fort Ticonderoga
"for the past few months.
"Jamie commands a crew of
men we met on the ship over
"who call themselves
'Fraser's Irregulars.'
And as you can imagine.
your father likes that."
[construction clanging]
"They're building redoubts
to help protect the fort
"in case of attack.
"Meanwhile. I've been
helping the sick and injured
"under one Lieutenant Stactoe.
"a man who thinks he's
a surgeon but isn't
"and thinks that I am
not because I am a woman.
"Ian joined us again. having
made his way north by land.
"gathering information
from the Indian tribes.
"Meanwhile. the British
Army are approaching us
"from the north. but
Major General St. Clair
is confident the
fort will hold."
[Brianna] "We'll stay
and help the cause
"until your father is
released from service
"on the 10th of July.
"He dreams of the
children now and then.
"I think of them
every single day.
"We send all our love.
Mama."
I know Fort Ticonderoga;
my father took me there.
Aye.
We could always scour
the history books.
see if there's any
mention of them.
[Brianna] Not that one.
Maybe it's better we don't know.
[melancholic music plays]
♪ ♪
[Fermoy] Colonel Fraser.
what progress has been
made on the defenses?
Construction should be complete
within a fortnight. sir.
[Fermoy] Excellent.
Colonel Kosciuszko?
General Fermoy...
if I may.
I believe we are
vulnerable to attack
from Sugar Loaf Hill.
I-if the British should take it.
and I have reason to
believe they will try.
they will have
the higher ground.
We should station men here.
on Sugar Loaf. immediately.
I cannot believe they'd
be foolish enough
to attempt such a thing.
The terrain is too
treacherous and too steep
for soldiers to scale.
If there are Highlanders
among them...
[Fermoy laughs]
Yes. Highlanders.
Or goats.
[laughter]
Where a goat can go.
a man can go. sir.
And where a man can
go. he can drag a gun.
Cannon fire will reach us.
No man could drag a
cannon to that summit.
Highlander or otherwise.
General St. Clair
would agree with me.
I assure you. Burgoyne
will not dare attack
from a mountain
across the water.
Wi' all due respect. sir...
You are dismissed.
Colonel Fraser.
[dark music plays]
♪ ♪
[William] I'm sorry. Mr. Hunter.
You say you do not
believe in violence
of any kind and yet.
by your own admission.
there you were.
chopping up corpses.
[Denzell] For medical purposes.
I'd hardly call it
"violence" as such.
There is only so much to
be learned from texts.
[William] And where
is it you get these
unfortunate specimens. eh?
They are executed
criminals. but...
But you call me a brute for
thinking we are better off
without such villains
living among us.
Dispatch 'em. I say.
Does thee not
believe it is a sin
to take someone's life. William?
The life of a murderer?
No.
I call it justice.
But an army surgeon...
I simply cannot fathom why
you did not choose a more...
a more peaceable
profession. Mr. Hunter.
[Denzell] Well. when
our parents died.
a relative of mine
arranged for me
to attend a medical
college in London.
I believe it is a
noble profession
and one that suits me well.
But say a crime were committed
against your lovely
sister. Mr. Hunter.
or against your
brother. Miss Hunter.
You would hold fast
to your principles?
We rely upon God's
judgment alone.
Or the willingness of others
to commit violence for you.
I think we shall have to agree
to disagree on this matter.
We Quakers cannot be
shaken from our beliefs.
We tremble only before
God and His word.
[Rachel] Look there.
[sawing]
[Antioch] Well met. all.
Where're ye bound?
[William] Towards Albany.
Ah. ye're on the
wrong road. sir.
Are you certain?
We were told this
was the best route.
[Antioch] I am certain.
You ought to've gone left
at the crossroads. sir.
It's several hours ride
back to the crossroads.
[Denzell] Should we make
camp here for the night?
[Antioch] Why don't you
come back to my house?
My wife would be pleased to
offer you supper and a bed.
That's quite generous of you.
♪ ♪
I hope you have not
gone to too much trouble
on our account.
We don't often have guests.
Please. eat.
We lived in abundance
on this farm
before the army started
marching through.
Thriving. we were
before they started taking
our crops. our horses.
the very clothes off our backs.
Which army was it?
Both of 'em.
I'm sorry to hear it.
Aye.
♪ ♪
Aren't you hungry. love?
You haven't touched your food.
♪ ♪
Uh. I beg thy pardon.
I think I must take some air.
[exhales steadily]
[William] Miss Hunter.
Are you well?
I needed to remove myself
from the stench of that stew.
- Didst thou see...
- No.
And I shall be a
good deal happier
if you do not tell me.
[chuckles]
I suppose we should be grateful
that the Johnsons could
spare us any food at all.
given their humble
circumstances.
You're right. of course.
We will leave at dawn.
This sounds agreeable.
And if they are kind enough
to offer us breakfast
in the morning. our answer
will be a resounding "No."
[laughs]
[light music plays]
♪ ♪
Have a great day at work
and leave the rest to me.
- [sighs]
- Not to worry.
I have everything under control.
Oh. and bring your
hard hat home with you.
Why?
I thought you could
wear it to bed.
Oh.
I can do that.
Ah. I would say "without
your knickers on."
but you don't seem
to be wearing any.
Mm-mm.
Just something new I'm trying.
- Huh.
- Or old.
Got so used to not wearing
them in the 18th century.
just sort of feels weird now.
[Roger] Well. that's a shame.
I like you in your knickers.
You like taking them off.
[Roger laughs]
Mm.
[giggles]
- [giggles]
- [laughs] Hello.
[grunts]
All right. sweetheart.
Mommy's gotta go to work.
Will you be good for Daddy?
- [Mandy] Yeah.
- Yeah?
Come here. baby. Mwah.
Bye.
No mischief. you two.
Mischief? Us?
♪ ♪
[upbeat music plays]
[machinery humming loudly]
- [Ross] Mike. Mike.
- Morning. sir.
[Ross] Up here's
the turbine room.
You'll have seen
one of these before.
[Brianna] Yep.
[Ross] Apologies for the noise.
They're replacing
a turbine today.
We're in this one.
♪ ♪
[engine rumbles]
Oh.
You'll need these to get around.
Oh. thanks.
[Ross] Maintenance and Repairs.
This is Mrs. MacKenzie.
your new plant inspector.
She's already familiar
with the tunnel schematics.
but she could do with
a tour of the grounds.
Introduce yourselves
and get her up to speed.
Good luck.
[clears throat]
I hear you're replacing
a rudder blade
on one of the turbines today.
Can someone take me
to the valve room?
That's my project.
I'll take you.
Thanks. I appreciate it. Mr...
Cameron.
Rob Cameron.
And this is two of
my crew. Craig Dowd
Andy Pfeiffer.
Ah. nice to meet
you. Madam Inspector.
[chuckles]
Aye. charmed.
Right. come on then.
Got a busy day ahead of us.
And a pint at the Ryeland
waiting for us tonight.
Every night.
[intriguing music plays]
♪ ♪
[Rob] Oh. the door's open.
You pass me your keys.
I'll show you which one
unlocks it for the future.
[Brianna] Oh. great.
Ladies first.
You can take my
torch if you want.
Thanks.
[door hinges creak]
[door slams]
Hello?
[lock clicks]
[Rob and Andy laugh]
All right. very funny.
[Andy] Good luck.
Madam Inspector.
We'll leave your
keys on your desk!
Go. go. go. go!
- Hey!
- [engine turns over]
[groans softly] Really?
[switch clicking]
[torch clangs]
[soft music plays]
♪ ♪
[match strikes]
[sighs] Come on.
[electricity humming]
[sighs] Bastards.
[air whooshing]
[water dripping]
Oh. shit.
Left or right?
[exhales] Right.
[electricity humming]
[buzzing]
[roaring]
[high pitched squeal]
[groans]
[roaring continues]
[roaring fades]
[panting]
[wind blowing]
[breathing deeply]
[sighs]
[soft martial music plays]
♪ ♪
[goats bleaing]
[inaudible speaking]
[aide-de-camp] Is
that understood?
- You sent for me. sir?
- [aide-de-camp] Ah.
General St. Clair was
told you speak Mohawk
and lived among them for a time.
Aye.
He trusts you're familiar
with Joseph Brant.
known as Thayendanegea.
I am.
[aide-de-camp] The
British have promised land
to the Mohawk in return
for an alliance with them.
We. of course. would
prefer they supported us.
The general received
word Brant is staying
in the village of Shadow Lake.
You're to deliver a letter.
which will contain
within it important...
I know of the village.
but respectfully. sir.
uh. can you kindly
ask the general
to send another scout?
Why is that?
There are personal reasons. sir.
[aide-de-camp]
Unfortunately. Mr. Murray.
war does not allow
for personal reasons.
The general requires
that you leave today.
That's an order.
[serious music plays]
♪ ♪
[children yelling indistinctly]
Auntie. can I speak to ye?
I-I ken ye're busy. but...
No. of course.
Bairns.
I'm-I'm wonderin'
how they come to be.
Ian. I...
I refuse to believe that you
don't know how babies are made.
I want to know why.
What went wrong?
[Claire] You mean with
the child that you lost?
Aye.
Iseabail.
What's wrong with me?
Why do you think
anything's wrong with you?
Emily's grandmother. Tsotehweh.
believed that to conceive.
a-a man's spirit must
overcome a woman's.
Emily has a child
now with Kaheroton.
Well. his spirit
was strong enough.
but mine wasna?
I could... I could
never take another wife
if I kent I'd never
give her bairns.
Uncle Jamie told
me about the. uh...
the-the sperm?
I wondered if there might be
something wrong with mine.
Could-could ye maybe... look?
Oh. Ian. I don't
think that would help.
Well. and I would
need a microscope.
[sighs]
Did you ever see your daughter?
She was wrapped up on the...
on the cradleboard
for the funeral.
I...
I didn't have a chance.
Did Emily ever say...
did she ever say there was
anything wrong with the child?
Was she deformed in any way?
Emily said Iseabail was...
perfect.
The truth is. Ian.
many women lose children.
yeah. either through stillbirth.
or miscarriages for
any number of reasons.
Yeah. actually it's
quite common...
though women seldom
talk about it.
Now I could list all of
the medical conditions
that could've caused it. but...
[bittersweet music plays]
I can assure you.
this has nothing to
do with your spirit
and everything to
do with science.
So ye're sayin' there...
there's nothin' wrong with me?
What I'm saying
is that there's every chance
you won't have a problem having
a child with another woman.
Oh. thank ye. Auntie.
♪ ♪
[fire crackling]
[insects trilling]
[grunts]
[stomach gurgles]
[wincing]
[stairs creaking]
Mr. Johnson. you
couldn't sleep either?
[tense music plays]
Denny. wake up!
- [screams]
- [William grunts]
[groaning]
- [knife clatters]
[Rachel] Stop it!
Leave my brother alone!
[Denzell] Rachel. get back!
[Rachel and Denzell grunting]
[Rachel] Stop. Mrs. Johnson.
What's wrong with you?
[grunts. pants]
♪ ♪
[Denzell] Rachel. grab her!
[Rachel] Stop!
[groans]
- [William panting]
- [roars]
[both grunting]
[groans]
[panting]
[Rachel gasping] William!
[women gasping]
[grunts]
[all panting]
♪ ♪
[Rachel] Thee saved our lives.
I don't know how to thank thee.
You can thank that rotten stew.
Had I not awoken with
such terrible pain
in my stomach...
Where is your brother?
He's with wife.
She confessed. but
claims her husband
forces her to help him.
So they've done this before?
She showed us a
cupboard full of jewelry
and other ill-gotten gains.
She offered them to us if
we'll leave her in peace.
We won't accept. of course.
[William] How many victims
did they lure inside
and then butcher in
their sleep. I wonder?
She is begging for mercy.
She has lost her husband.
'Tis in God's hands now.
Punishment enough. perhaps.
What is it?
William?
[somber music plays]
♪ ♪
I've never killed anyone before.
I do not...
I do not quite know
what to do about it.
I expected it to be in battle.
I-I think I would know how
to feel if it had been.
[Rachel] No.
Thee wouldn't.
You must think me disgraceful.
I know thee well enough
to know that's untrue.
♪ ♪
[Jamie] Claire.
[exhales]
Our scouts caught
a British regular.
He told us that Simon Fraser
is one of Burgoyne's brigadiers
and has the forward command.
- Simon Fraser?
- Aye.
And not the Old Fox
you met or his son.
but a second cousin.
Simon Fraser of Balnain.
verra bonny fighter.
I don't doubt it.
Worse. the British are
running short of food.
horses.
If they dinna have
enough supplies.
they'll no be able
to surround us
and wait for us to surrender.
They'll need to...
they'll need to take
the fort by force.
I think they'll put
cannon on Sugar Loaf Hill.
Have you talked
to General Fermoy?
Fermoy's not
particularly receptive
to the concerns of
his subordinates.
[scoffs] He sounds like an arse.
He's a very proud man.
He insists they willna
make it up there.
but-but I ken how a
Highlander thinks.
If there's a higher
ground to take.
then Simon Fraser
will find a way.
Could you warn St.
Clair directly?
[sighs] Fermoy has
the general's ear.
so it's Fermoy I must persuade.
Wouldna be wise
to go around him.
It could be very bad for my men.
But he's convinced an
attack will come by land.
and not from across the water.
It reminds me of the
Battle of Singapore.
though the other way around.
In World War II. the British
were stationed there.
and General Percival had
his guns aimed at the sea.
convinced that the
surrounding jungles
were too dangerous and
dense to penetrate.
And he was proved to be wrong?
The Japanese cut their
way through the jungles
and attacked his defenses
at the weakest point.
by land.
And seeing is believing.
Of course. by that
point. it was too late.
Seeing is believin'.
You've given me an idea.
[hopeful music plays]
♪ ♪
[William] This is where we part.
Ticonderoga lies this direction.
My way lies farther north.
We thank thee for escorting us.
[William] Should
any British troops
or Hessians molest you.
tell them that you demand
to see their officer
and that you know his friend.
And if they demand to know
the name of this friend.
Harold Grey. Duke of Pardloe.
And who is Harold?
Some kin to me.
[exhales heavily]
I would like you
to have the money.
♪ ♪
And I shall hold on to this.
I thank thee. but we will
do well enough without it.
I insist.
Fare thee well.
[horse snorts]
♪ ♪
Thee knows he is
a British soldier?
Likely a deserter.
And if he is?
Violence follows such a man.
Is thee not taking
me to join an army?
I think thee may be a
hypocrite. Denzell Hunter.
Mm.
Say the word and I'll find
thee a place with friends.
where thee may stay in safety.
The Lord spoke to me.
and I must follow my conscience.
But there is no need for
thee to follow it too.
The Lord spoke to me as well.
He said. "Keep thy fat-headed
brother from dying."
[laughs]
If thee are going to
join the army. Denny.
let us go and find it.
♪ ♪
[soft music plays]
[speaking Mohawk]
Wolf's Brother...
My heart is warm to see you.
Mine. too.
What brings you here?
[Young Ian] Uh. my general sent
me to speak with Thayendanegea.
Joseph Brant. about the war.
Yes. he's staying
at our village.
But first. will ye walk with me?
I... I can't go far.
My son...
and daughter. newly born.
Yer family has grown.
I wish to say to
ye that I'm sorry
that I could not
give ye children
and that... and that
I'm glad ye have them.
Are ye happy. Wahionhaweh?
I am.
♪ ♪
Ye dinna ask me
whether I am happy.
I have eyes.
May I meet your son?
Sweetheart. come here.
[giggles]
Hmm.
[baby cries]
I must attend to my daughter.
[baby fussing]
What's your name?
Swiftest of Lizards.
Are you Wolf's Brother?
I am. Your mother
taught ye English?
[Swiftest of Lizards] Yes.
My grandmother talks about you.
What does she say?
She says I'm the
child of your spirit.
- Does she?
- [Swiftest of Lizards] Yes.
But I should not
say so to my father.
[sentimental music plays]
♪ ♪
Will you choose
a name for him...
of your people?
For when he walks in that world.
Thank you.
Your name is Ian James.
- Ian James.
- [Young Ian] Mm-hmm.
[chuckles]
- I like it.
- [laughs]
[sandpaper scratching]
[blows]
[engine rumbling]
[horn honks]
Jemmy.
It's not safe in here. Come on out.
Come on.
[chuckles softly]
What's wrong. son?
Ye can tell me.
No.
Well. why didn't you come
up to the house then?
Huh?
For Dad's regular
teatime special:
beans on toast?
I... got in trouble at school.
What for?
Tommy Reid said me and Mama
and Mandy were all gonna burn
in hell as papists.
Well. you know what
to say to that.
"I'll see ye there."
And I did.
only I said it in the Gaelic.
Miss Glendenning
didn't like that.
She grabbed me by
the ear and said.
"In this classroom.
we speak English."
She shook me. Da.
And I cursed at her.
one of Grandda's curses.
So she called the headmaster.
and he made me hold out my hands
and gave me three with the belt.
Am I in trouble?
Come here. son.
Ye're not mad?
[scoffs softly]
Not at you.
Why is it bad to speak Gaelic?
It's not.
Dinna fash. We'll sort it out.
I promise.
Come on.
And pick up your wrappers.
Don't leave your rubbish
out here anymore.
It's not my rubbish. Da.
[Claire] You must try to
get some sleep. Mrs. Raven.
You're overtired.
[Mrs. Raven] How can I sleep.
when any moment we may be
set upon by the British Army.
or worse. Indians.
I've heard they cut
off pieces of you...
fingers first. one
joint at a time.
I'll prepare some herbs that'll
help you settle your nerves.
but you have to try and
keep these terrible thoughts
out of your mind.
How can I?
My husband and son were killed.
[Claire] I'm so sorry.
I-I'll get something
that'll help you rest.
[Stactoe] I'm in
charge here. sir.
We'll do this my way. and
we will cut below the knee.
especially as the
patient might lose...
Can I help you?
Lieutenant Stactoe.
I don't believe we've met.
Denzell Hunter. And thee is?
Mrs. Fraser.
[Stactoe] You may
move along. madam.
We've work to do.
[Walter] Please. is it true?
They tell me it will
need to be amputated.
I'm afraid they're right.
Your foot is gangrenous.
I am sorry.
What were you debating?
Nothing for you to
remark upon. certainly.
We were discussing the degree
of amputation required.
The good surgeon wishes
to cut below the knee
to preserve the joint.
Well. I'm inclined to agree
with Lieutenant Stactoe.
Well. I believe we must perform
a mid-femoral amputation.
Walter has a popliteal
aneurysm. meaning that...
[Claire] That the artery
is in danger of rupturing.
Yes.
You're right.
I'm so sorry. Walter.
I'll go fetch some
boiling water.
[Denzell] Boiling water?
To sterilize the instruments
to prevent
post-operative infection.
[Denzell] I see.
Mrs. Fraser. you
will not subject
my blades to boiling water.
It will ruin the
temper of the metal.
Hot water will do
nothing but clean them.
and I can't let you use a
dirty blade on this man.
Let me?
I do not need your
permission. madam.
Perhaps I should perform
the operation. Lieutenant.
as the surgeon with
a degree in medicine.
Would thee care to assist me?
I would.
[Stactoe] Very well
then. Dr. Hunter.
Butcher this man
however you like.
but you won't be
using my equipment.
[light music plays]
♪ ♪
No matter.
I have a set of my own.
I'll send my sister
to fetch them
along with a pan
of boiling water.
Walter. I think it
best you get some rest.
What are we doing here. Colonel?
I was told there was a
matter of great importance.
There is.
See for yourself. sir.
Is that our cannon
and our soldiers?
My men hauled it to
the summit this morning
wi' the permission of
the captain of artillery.
If they can do
it. ye can be sure
Simon Fraser and
his men will. too.
[Fermoy] What are you doing?
- They're aiming at us.
- [cannon booms]
[people screaming]
[Jamie] Stand down.
We're not under attack!
[soldiers yelling]
Have the men stop.
Tell them to get
back to their posts.
[soldier] Return to your posts!
What have you done?
The fort is within firing range.
Now ye've seen it
wi' yer own eyes.
The only thing I
have seen. Colonel.
is your flagrant
disregard for authority.
I instructed them
to aim wide. sir.
only meant to demonstrate the
vulnerability of our defenses.
[Stactoe] By creating another?
Taking men and cannon outside
the protection of these walls?
What if they fell
into enemy hands?
This entire fort will fall
into the enemy's hands
if we dinna put
men on that hill.
[Stactoe] Enough.
How dare you humiliate me. sir.
disobeying my order with this
reckless public spectacle.
I should put you in chains
for your insubordination!
Fortunately for you.
I cannot spare a single soldier.
If and when the British
attack. by land.
we need every man inside
to defend the fort!
Bring your men and
that cannon back here.
immediately.
And they are not to
leave the fort again.
[dark music plays]
♪ ♪
Ian Murray.
Miss Hunter.
I didna expect to see you again.
[Rachel] We heard there
was a need for surgeons.
My brother wished to lend
his support to the army.
Hmm. that's brave of
ye. to leave yer home.
[Rachel] My friend
William recovered well
and accompanied us on a
large part of our journey.
We were grateful for his
protection on the road.
Well. now that ye're here.
I offer my protection.
I welcome thy protection.
though hope I don't
need it. [laughs]
[chuckles]
Are those medicinal herbs?
Uh. aye.
Um. whenever I'm
sent off to scout.
I forage for my Auntie Claire.
Claire Fraser is thy aunt?
We've been working
closely with her.
Suppose I'll be
seein' more of ye.
I suppose so.
[soft music plays]
♪ ♪
[Claire] No sign of infection.
And it's healing nicely.
Ah. though you will have
to stay in bed for a while.
So dancing's out
of the question?
[both chuckles]
You like to dance. Mr. Woodcock?
My wife does.
Yeah. that's how
we fell in love...
mm. dancing.
[laughs softly]
I'm sure she misses
you very much.
I hope so.
We. uh. didn't part
on the best of terms.
But thanks to you. I have
a chance to see her again.
Put things right.
[Brianna] But then the tunnel
split in two directions.
[Jemmy] Which way did you go?
Well. luckily. I had studied
the tunnel schematics.
so I knew where to
go; I went right.
Magic.
And that's why you always
do your homework. pal.
[Brianna] Exactly.
And then when I finally got out.
all of my coworkers applauded.
[applause]
You were really brave. Mama.
Oh.
Thanks. kiddo.
[Roger] This calls for a toast.
Mm?
Cheers to my brave
wife on her first day.
Sláinte.
- Sláinte.
- [Brianna] Yeah.
Sláinte.
[laughter]
[melancholic music plays]
♪ ♪
[Roger] Come with
me for a minute?
Finish your dessert. kids.
I thought you had a great day?
[Brianna] I didn't want
to upset you and the kids.
but it was shit.
It was totally horrible.
I am furious. Roger.
This-this wasn't just hazing.
They did this to me
because I'm a woman.
[sighs]
- Arseholes.
- [groans]
I knew this was gonna be hard.
I knew that. but I'm-I just...
I'm worried they're
never gonna respect me.
I imagine that's what it
was like for your mother
that first day at
Harvard Medical School.
Being the only woman
in a class full of men.
it's not gonna be easy.
But you made it through today...
and I think that's
something worth celebratin'.
[soft music plays]
♪ ♪
I have a little
something for you.
[drawer clatters]
[laughs] A hidden drawer?
[Roger] I found it
yesterday when one
of the drawers got stuck.
[Brianna] What is it?
Wow.
Oh. Roger. It's beautiful.
[laughs]
I love it. You did
not have to do this.
I wanted to.
You know. for you
to use at work.
to make sure you know
that I am so proud of you.
And I'm sorry I didn't make
that clearer from the start.
Thank you.
Maybe you should put
your knickers back on.
[Mandy screams]
[hurried footsteps]
Jem. what's goin' on?
[Jemmy] It wasn't me. I swear.
She saw someone
outside and was scared.
but I didn't see anyone.
[Brianna] Mandy. honey. hey.
Did you see someone outside?
The Nuckelavee.
[Roger] Well. maybe
she did see someone.
I saw some. uh. food wrappings
on the ground earlier.
I'll have a look.
Hon. shh. shh. You're okay.
Jem. you okay. baby?
[eerie music plays]
♪ ♪
[tense music plays]
[speaking French] Goddammit!
Burgoyne's cannon will likely
reach the summit by daybreak.
How is it we were not
prepared for this?
No one could have
foreseen it. sir.
[St. Clair] Do we think their
cannon can reach our walls?
- I think they can. sir.
- [curses]
Then I see no other choice.
We must evacuate immediately.
[officers muttering]
But sir. we cannot abandon
the fort without a fight.
Burgoyne's soldiers
outnumber ours twofold.
If they breach our walls...
[Jamie] Mayor
General. if I may...
I've already ordered my men
to commandeer boats and canoes
at Lake Champlain.
The water will carry
civilians faster
than the British can march.
Take as many as you can.
The rest of you. gather
supplies and artillery.
Destroy whatever
you cannot carry.
We must leave nothing
behind for Burgoyne's army.
♪ ♪
[Roger] Bree?
The kids are in the
house. glued to the telly.
so we have about 15 minutes.
[exhales]
I think. uh.
I have an appointment
for an inspection.
[Brianna] Oh. do you now?
I'd love to. but...
But?
[light music plays]
♪ ♪
There's something I have to do.
I'll be here when ye get home.
[chatter. laughter]
You coming again that weekend?
[patron clears throat]
Wrong place. lassie.
Knitting club's down the street.
So who do I have
to lock in a tunnel
to get a drink around here?
Well. I heard you made it
out in record time. Hen.
[snorts]
[laughter]
[Rob] No. seriously. Seriously.
You see. Craig here would
have definitely gotten lost.
Yeah. he'd be in there
for about three days.
[laughing] No. he'd have
still been in there.
- [Andy laughs]
- Oh. no. he'd have still
- been in there.
- No. no. no. no. man.
[laughter]
[Rob] Hey. Donny!
Bring a pint of your finest
over here for my colleague.
[worker 1] Yeah.
no. no. no. man.
[whispering] Look. you had
your fun and games yesterday.
We'll call it a clean slate.
But if you ever do
anything like that again.
I will have the
lot of you fired.
[workers conversing happily]
- [worker 2] That works!
- [worker 3] It does.
Oh. and don't call me "Hen."
[Andy] Well. it works
for some people.
Fair enough. Gov.
[workers chattering]
[Claire] How long do we have?
A few hours at most.
[sighs]
We'll bring as many as we can.
[dark music plays]
♪ ♪
[Walter] Are we under
attack. Mrs. Fraser?
Walter...
we have to evacuate.
Oh. I think I can walk
with a little support.
[Claire] I'm so sorry.
but it's too soon.
The sutures won't hold.
It's too dangerous.
If there were any way I could.
I'd take you with me.
I understand.
[sighs]
Uh. you go on then.
Big Red needs you
and so do the others.
It's best that you stay here.
You're injured. The British will
have to show you mercy.
Mercy.
[scoffs]
If you keep the wound clean
and don't put too
much strain on it.
it will heal quickly.
Here.
This is laudanum.
It will help with the
pain and help you sleep.
Just don't take too much.
This war. it will
be over one day...
and you can go
home to your wife.
Goodbye. Walter.
Godspeed. Mrs. Fraser.
♪ ♪
[Jamie] Come now.
- [person] Grab a paddle.
- Quick as ye can.
[person] Grab a paddle.
Follow the boats
that have gone ahead.
[tense music plays]
[people shouting indistinctly]
♪ ♪
[soft music plays]
[rain pattering softly]
Jem said he built
this for you. Da.
He said that he and Mandy
come here to talk to you.
Well...
Something I think
you'd be proud of.
got a new job. working at a dam.
[sighs] Well. I'm-I'm
the plant inspector.
which kinda means
I'm everybody's boss.
It's not really that easy.
tellin' the lads what to do.
Even in this time.
it's complicated.
Roger and I bought Lallybroch.
I wish you and Ma could see it.
♪ ♪